Document what Nix *is* (#6420)
NixOS/nix: doc/manual/src/architecture/store/store.md

# Store

> A Nix store is a collection of *store objects* with references between them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Nix store is a collection of file system objects with references between them.
```

"Store object" is new to me and collides with `class Store` in the implementation.

I understand the desire to have an abstraction for a store path with references, but as far as I know, this abstraction isn't used anywhere else.

Reviewer 2: "Store object" is terminology from the PhD thesis. It's not commonly used, but this is because no one else ever documented it. They are decidedly different from file system objects, because FSOs don't model references.

> I understand the desire to have an abstraction for a store path with references, but as far as I know, this abstraction isn't used anywhere else.

This was a point of contention, but we deliberated to focus on the principles and separating data model from implementation.

Arrows indicate suggested reading order.

```
                      ,--------------[ store ]----------------,
                      |                  |                    |
                      v                  v                    v
               [ store object ]     [ closure ]--,      [ operations ]
                      |               |   |      |        |        |
                      v               |   |      v        v        |
           [ files and processes ]    |   | [ garbage collection ] |
               /          \           |   |                        |
              v            v          |   v                        v
[ file system object ] [ store path ] | [ derivation ]--->[ building ]
                  |        ^      |   |                         |
                  v        |      v   v                         |
             [ digest ]----' [ reference scanning ]<------------'
              /      \
             v        v
[ input addressing ] [ content addressing ]
```

## Store Object {#store-object}

A store object can hold

- arbitrary *data*
- *references* to other store objects.

> Nix makes no distinction if store objects are build inputs, build results, or build tasks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Nix store makes no distinction if store objects are build inputs, build results, or build tasks.
```

> A Nix store makes no distinction if store objects are build inputs, build results, or build tasks.

Reviewer: Yet a ~store object~ store can not build a store path that isn't a derivation.

If we're going to keep the new abstraction, may I suggest "store node"?

Reviewer 2: That sentence is probably confusing. It was meant to say that the store keeps all of these in a collection without distinction. What about that?

```suggestion
Store objects can be build inputs, build results, or build tasks.
```

Store objects are [immutable][immutable-object]: once created, they do not change until they are deleted.

## Reference {#reference}

A store object reference is an [opaque][opaque-data-type], [unique identifier][unique-identifier]:
The only way to obtain references is by adding or building store objects.
A reference will always point to exactly one store object.

> 

Reviewer 2: At this point in the narrative, store paths are a file-system-oriented implementation detail, which we try to convey in the Files and Processes section.

I know, the source code calls them store paths even if they are really store object references, given how they are used. The goal of this chapter is to get to the essence of Nix, so right now I don't care what's in the source code.

It would be great to have consistent naming. @thufschmitt agreed it would be nice in general to rename things in the source code, but it's entirely out of scope for the work here. Feel free to attack that, many people would be happy to see it happening.
